Edit Elastic Scaling (#6644)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn/learn-elastic-scaling.md

with **elastic scaling**: parachains can use multiple cores to include multiple parablocks within
the same relay chain block.

The capabilities of elastic scaling were tested live on Kusama in December 2024 with [the Spammening Event](https://polkadot.com/spammening/). During this event, 143,343 TPS were recorded on 23 out of 100 cores (23% capacity), consistently achieving an average block time of 6.3 seconds and finality of 16.5 seconds.

> !!! info "Polkadot 2.0"

Reviewer: I think I would leave out "Polkadot 2.0" here, as it seems that the upgrade path is more akin to "Polkadot -> JAM", and maybe it would be better to leave this page as purely elastic scaling-focused.

Author: The thing is that the community voted on a Wish for change proposal, saying that Polkadot 2.0 includes elastic scaling: https://polkadot.subsquare.io/referenda/747

Will add this to the page :)

cores (C1 and C2). Note how P2 and P4 are included after 18 seconds (not 12 seconds) because when P1
and P3 were pushed to the relay chain for being backed, there were no other parablocks before them.

The relay chain receives a sequence of parachain blocks on multiple cores, which are validated and
checked if all their state roots line up during their inclusion, but assume they’re unrelated
parachain blocks during backing, availability, and approvals. With elastic scaling implemented, a
parachain's throughput depends upon its collator infrastructure.

If the pace per core on the relay chain will not change (backing and inclusion every 6 seconds per
core), on the parachain side, collators will need to increase the parablock production rate to push
P1 and P3 to the two relay chain cores.

## Elastic Scaling Benefits

> - **Higher throughput**: Parachains can utilize multiple cores simultaneously, enabling much faster transaction processing. Previously, parachains were limited to one block per Relay Chain block. They can handle much greater capacity with elastic scaling, significantly increasing overall performance.

Reviewer: With the exception that they have powerful enough collators that are able to process more transactions (and subsequently, make and process more blocks) faster ;)

Author: Yes, this is specified. I will unify the sections where it is mentioned ;)

- **Cost efficiency for applications**: Applications only pay for the resources they use, saving money and reducing upfront costs. Coretime can be purchased dynamically - by the block, hour, or month. This is perfect for apps with bursts in activity, like online auctions or sudden social media surges.

- **Flexible scaling for new applications**: Elastic scaling allows applications to start small with On-Demand Coretime and scale up seamlessly beyond one core when demand grows. This prevents over-allocation (wasting money on unused resources) or under-allocation (causing performance issues), both common in traditional setups.

- **Resource optimization**: Parachains can load-balance their core usage by leasing additional cores when demand increases and releasing them when activity subsides. Secondary markets for coretime also ensure that unused resources are reallocated efficiently, optimizing overall system performance.

- **Improved user experience**: End-users enjoy smooth and reliable performance, even during peak traffic. Applications no longer face the risk of slowing down or freezing when demand spikes, ensuring a consistent, high-quality experience.

> Elastic scaling increases the single-shard performance. Polkadot’s approach to scaling has traditionally been to scale via multiple parachains, called “horizontal scaling” or “horizontal sharding”. However, setting up and parallelizing processes over multiple parachains and opening channels via XCM takes time and effort. With elastic scaling, projects can benefit from higher throughput before parallelizing processes over multiple parachains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Elastic scaling increases the throughput of a parachain. Polkadot’s approach to scaling has traditionally been to scale via multiple parachains, called “horizontal scaling” or “horizontal sharding” through cross-consensus messaging (XCM). However, setting up and parallelizing processes over multiple parachains and opening channels via XCM takes time and effort. With elastic scaling, projects can benefit from higher throughput before parallelizing processes over multiple parachains.
```

- **Growing applications & startups**: Startups and new projects often face unpredictable user growth. Elastic scaling allows them to start with minimal resources (e.g., a single core) and scale seamlessly as user demand increases before scaling horizontally, thus preventing overcommitting resources upfront. This ensures applications can grow efficiently while maintaining performance and cost-effectiveness.

- **Large-scale IoT applications**: IoT systems require massive scalability to process data from millions of devices. Elastic scaling enables parachains to process high transaction volumes cost-effectively, while Polkadot’s model ensures the privacy and security needed in IoT environments.

- **Real-time applications**: Some applications require low latency and real-time performance (e.g., gaming, payments / financial services, or data feeds). These benefit from elastic scaling’s ability to reduce latency down to 2s. This ensures smooth and reliable performance during high-demand scenarios.

> ## Elastic Scaling Roadmap

Reviewer: Maybe mention that it is already on Kusama (in MVP format?)

Author: I would refrain from adding things that have a short lifespan and require us to update frequently. Stuff like "currently live on Kusama" or "this new feature", etc. Imo we should aim to get the wiki as static as possible.

Reviewer: That's a very good point, agreed!
